المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة فرعا : العلوم العامة وعلوم الحياة نموذج : رقم (2) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغـة الإنكليزيـة وآدابها المركز التربوي للحوثِ والإنماء نموذج مسابقة (يراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي 2016-2017 وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 24/40) Read the selection below about promoting human rights and then answer the questions that follow. The Right to Human Rights 1 Approaches to international work on human rights have indicated some significant change over the past decade. While the international community continues to speak out strongly in denunciation of the illegal acts of human rights violations, governments and civil society have become more aware that the promotion and protection of human rights involve more than identifying alleged wrongdoers and advising governments to improve their performance. Policy- makers and advocates increasingly recognize that genuine improvements require resources and long-term efforts in the areas of education and institutional strengthening. 2 The strong desire to protect human rights principles more effectively points out to the strengthened environment of democracy that increasingly prevails in all regions of the world. More specifically, it is recognized not only that human rights principles are important for the well- being of individuals and communities but also that they are an essential component of economic and social progress. 3 The popular movement that underpins these developments has been inspired by the human rights standards enshrined in instruments and resolutions developed within the framework of the United Nations, particularly the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants on Human Rights. It has also been facilitated by information technology revolution, which ensures that human rights advocates and media organizations have effective means of drawing worldwide public attention to human rights violations and issues. These themes have converged with modern management and governance principles, which see the achievement of long-term economic development and other goals as dependent on openness, democratic systems of government, accountability, an active civil society and the rule of the law. 4 Besides, adopting an institutional strengthening approach to human rights promotion and protection is a realistic and pragmatic option. It acknowledges that improving human rights is a public policy objective that can be achieved through the normal planning and the government processes of resource distribution. It integrates human rights objectives into the general objectives of the state, particularly development, so that the nation as a whole would ultimately benefit and become more strengthened. 5 More importantly, this approach recognizes that no country is perfect; all countries face human rights challenges in moving towards the objective of "better standards of life in larger freedom". To meet these challenges successfully, governments and communities must work together to change attitudes by intensifying human rights education programs and strengthening human rights institutions. 1

6 National action plans require considerable planning and effort. The practical value of a national plan will not necessarily be the same in all situations. A decision whether or not to embark on such a plan needs to be taken in a serious and critical fashion in each case. Experience to date suggests that factors with a likely bearing on a particular plan's effectiveness include political support, transparent and participatory planning, comprehensiveness of the baseline human rights study underlying the plan, realistic prioritization and action-oriented planning, clear success criteria and strong participatory mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation, and adequate commitment of resources. 7 Subject to certain considerations, it would be reasonable to expect outcomes from a national action plan such as more effective incorporation of more international standards at the national level to ensure an expansion of human rights protection for individuals. This is also connected to better awareness and implementation of economic, social and cultural rights, leading to an improved quality of life, particularly for vulnerable groups. 8 The improvements in human rights ultimately depend on the government of a particular country deciding on actions that bring about positive change. To promote successful changes in human rights implementation in public policy, many factors need to be taken into account.
---
 such a plan needs to be taken in a serious and critical fashion in each case. Experience to date suggests that factors with a likely bearing on a particular plan's effectiveness include political support, transparent and participatory planning, comprehensiveness of the baseline human rights study underlying the plan, realistic prioritization and action-oriented planning, clear success criteria and strong participatory mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation, and adequate commitment of resources. 7 Subject to certain considerations, it would be reasonable to expect outcomes from a national action plan such as more effective incorporation of more international standards at the national level to ensure an expansion of human rights protection for individuals. This is also connected to better awareness and implementation of economic, social and cultural rights, leading to an improved quality of life, particularly for vulnerable groups. 8 The improvements in human rights ultimately depend on the government of a particular country deciding on actions that bring about positive change. To promote successful changes in human rights implementation in public policy, many factors need to be taken into account. Social planning starts with comprehensive needs analysis and includes wide-ranging program proposals, allocation of resources and effective evaluation. Questions: A- Answer each of the following questions in 1-2 complete sentences using your own words. 1- Based on paragraph 2, why does the writer believe that democracy increasingly prevails in all regions of the world? (Score: 01.5) 2- Based on paragraph 3, what is the role of the information technology in the efforts related to human rights? (Score: 01) 3- What does the writer mean by the "significant change" in paragraph1? (Score: 02) 4- Based on paragraph 5, what conclusion can you draw about educational programs and human rights? (Score: 02) B- Copy the table below and then write the number of paragraph(s) that correspond(s) to each of the following headings. (Score:03) Headings Number of paragraph(s) The Value of National Action Plans Human Rights Implementation Institutional Strengthening C- 1- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 4 & 5? Explain.(Score: 02) 2- What is the pattern of organization of paragraph 6? Explain. (Score: 02) 3- What three types of audience might be interested in reading this selection? Explain the interest of each. (Score: 03) 2

D- The reading selection has eight paragraphs (1->8). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct part that completes ONE paragraph in the selection .Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->8) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score:02) Extract A- Genuine improvements in human rights implementation also require training and independent legal and judicial systems to ensure commitment to the rule of law. They also require a strong political will to put in place policies and programs that deliver basic services in areas such as health, education, housing and social welfare, particularly to vulnerable groups. Extract B- The most prominent activities that governments and communities are considering in this area probably include the establishment of national human rights institutions, the development of national programs of human rights education and the development of action plans for the promotion and protection of human rights. E- Find words in the indicated paragraphs that most nearly have the following meanings. (Score: 04) 1- condemnation (Paragraph 1) 2- to become dominant (Paragraph 2) 3- results (Paragraph 7) 4- fulfillment (Paragraph 7) F- Based on the selection, what does each of the following pronouns and phrase refer to? (Score: 01.5) 1- they (Paragraph 2) 2- It (Paragraph 3) 3- this approach (Paragraph 5) Part Two: Writing: Choose ONE of the following prompts: (Score: 16/40) Prompt (A): Read the following statement from an editorial about the rights of prisoners. Respecting human rights principles is important for the well-being of individuals, but to take all rights away from prisoners is to deny them their humanity. Thus, even prisoners should have their rights protected because they are unable to defend their own rights as human beings. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. 3

Prompt (B): Read the following statement from an article about the role of civil society. Members of civil society in every part of the world can contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights to make human rights and equality a universal reality. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to how members of the civil
---
 is important for the well-being of individuals, but to take all rights away from prisoners is to deny them their humanity. Thus, even prisoners should have their rights protected because they are unable to defend their own rights as human beings. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. 3

Prompt (B): Read the following statement from an article about the role of civil society. Members of civil society in every part of the world can contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights to make human rights and equality a universal reality. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to how members of the civil society (e.g. non-governmental institutions, networks, unions and non-profit organizations etc.) can use different means such as social media, fund raising, TV, press, guidance programs etc. to spread awareness and promote human rights. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 07), language and style (Score: 07), tidiness and handwriting (Score: 02). 4

المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة فرعا : العلوم العامة وعلوم الحياة نموذج : رقم (2) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للحوثِ وَالإنماء أسس التصحيح (تراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي 2016-2017 وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) A- 1- The writer believes that democracy prevails worldwide because there is an intention for making the protection of human rights principles more effective. Also, human rights principles are considered important for the well-being of communities and necessary for economic and social progress. 2- Information technology has facilitated the human rights popular movement by drawing the attention of the world to human rights issues and forms of violating these rights. 3- The "significant change" means that governments and civil society have become more aware that protecting human rights requires focusing on education and on strengthening institutions; not only naming wrongdoers and giving advice for better performance. 4- Educational programs can be effective in changing attitudes and meeting the challenges of human rights. B- Headings Number of paragraph(s) The Value of National Action Plans 6 & 7 Human Rights Implementation 8 Institutional Strengthening 4 & 5 C- 1- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 4, the writer explains how institutional strengthening is a useful approach for promoting human rights. Then, the writer starts paragraph 5 with "more importantly" to explain how this approach considers that human rights challenges are in all countries and how we can meet such challenges. 2- The writer uses listing as a pattern of organization. He /She lists the factors that most likely make a particular action plan effective. 3- The three types of audience might include governments, educators and civil society members. Governments might be interested in reading this selection to learn more about forms of human rights violation, educators to know the means of educating the public and spreading awareness and civil society members to improve their actions for promoting and protecting human rights. D- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 8. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 5. 5

E- 1- denunciation 2- prevails
---
 8 Institutional Strengthening 4 & 5 C- 1- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 4, the writer explains how institutional strengthening is a useful approach for promoting human rights. Then, the writer starts paragraph 5 with "more importantly" to explain how this approach considers that human rights challenges are in all countries and how we can meet such challenges. 2- The writer uses listing as a pattern of organization. He /She lists the factors that most likely make a particular action plan effective. 3- The three types of audience might include governments, educators and civil society members. Governments might be interested in reading this selection to learn more about forms of human rights violation, educators to know the means of educating the public and spreading awareness and civil society members to improve their actions for promoting and protecting human rights. D- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 8. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 5. 5

E- 1- denunciation 2- prevails 3- outcomes 4- implementation F- 1- "they" in paragraph 2 refers to human rights principles. 2- "It" in paragraph 3 refers to the popular movement. 3- "this approach" in paragraph 5 refers to institutional strengthening approach. 6
---
