المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : آداب وإنسانيات نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/٤ المدّة : ثلاث ساعات الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسـم: اللغـة الإنكليزيـة وآدابها Part One: Reading Comprehension المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء (Score: 42/70) Read the selection below about symbols in African philosophy and then answer the questions that follow. Symbols in African Philosophy 1 Way before communication, as we now know it, man has always communicated with symbols. This means that symbols have played a communicative role to humans in general and to Africans in particular. There is always a time when one runs out of words and symbols step in where words have failed. In African philosophy and culture, symbols play an important role. An overview of African philosophy helps to identify the challenges that it faces and understand how studying symbols can guarantee international recognition of African philosophy. 2 Philosophy literally means the love of wisdom. It is an unquenchable thirst to find answers to unending questions and meanings. It is the desire to investigate the reasons for things, events and even nature. Moreover, every philosophy is a cultural philosophy. Here, cultural is used in the sense that it reflects the realities, traditions and thoughts of a particular society. 3 Symbols have a highly revered place within African philosophy. To comment on symbols in African culture, the philosopher Stinger admits that "People in the West, who are influenced by materialism, often equate reality with physical reality whereas Africans often see the symbolic meaning of events because they are convinced that reality is more than what can be seen. They are often able to see a symbolic or spiritual meaning in events like sickness and death." 4 It is important to define what we mean by symbols before jumping into analyzing their significance in African philosophy. In general, symbols could be technical, logical or mystical expressions that represent another reality. They are unlike signs; while the former are always different from what they represent; signs can be understood as soon as they are seen. 5 But why should symbols be studied in African philosophy? One of the difficulties that confront African philosophy, observes Ukagba, author of What is African Philosophy, is the fact that there are as many African languages as African countries. So, there isn't an official language that represents African philosophy internationally. Western philosophy, in contrast, can be represented in English since it is a common language. Here appears the important role of symbols; they can be the "common language" of African philosophy, a necessary quality that can secure philosophical recognition and universal acceptance of African philosophy. 6 Secondly, African philosophy is challenged by academic racism. The international illusion among academic circles is that the African academic skill cannot be both good and original. Where it is original, it is not good; where it is good, it is not original. This sort of discrimination not only undermines African philosophy, but it also cripples any attempts to distinguish it. In this way, symbols can prove to be both original and good philosophic material that can distinguish African 1

philosophy. Yet, they are often dismissed from academic inspection since African philosophy is shunned from the international academic circles as inferior and unoriginal in the first place. 7 Shakespeare once observed that some are born great while some have greatness entrusted on them. This is the case with philosophers. Some are seen as philosophers without passing the rationality test while others have to pass hurdles to have the name "philosopher". African philosophers belong to this second class, and they have to work hard to achieve their greatness. They should do that by enhancing academic research on the interpretation of symbols in African philosophy. This "philosophy of symbols" will characterize African philosophy among internationally accepted philosophic trends. 8 How will that happen? Actually, the philosophy of symbols is a kind of hermeneutics interpretation that is universally acknowledged. It is a branch of knowledge that interprets the meaning of a symbol by considering what that symbol signifies. Hence, through the study of symbols, African philosophy can establish universality. 9 To sum up, it is asserted by many authors that symbols pervade the African life and give meaning to the Africans' shared existence. By nature, Africans cherish and
---
 7 Shakespeare once observed that some are born great while some have greatness entrusted on them. This is the case with philosophers. Some are seen as philosophers without passing the rationality test while others have to pass hurdles to have the name "philosopher". African philosophers belong to this second class, and they have to work hard to achieve their greatness. They should do that by enhancing academic research on the interpretation of symbols in African philosophy. This "philosophy of symbols" will characterize African philosophy among internationally accepted philosophic trends. 8 How will that happen? Actually, the philosophy of symbols is a kind of hermeneutics interpretation that is universally acknowledged. It is a branch of knowledge that interprets the meaning of a symbol by considering what that symbol signifies. Hence, through the study of symbols, African philosophy can establish universality. 9 To sum up, it is asserted by many authors that symbols pervade the African life and give meaning to the Africans' shared existence. By nature, Africans cherish and respect their unity and if symbols tighten that bond, then symbols cannot be isolated from African philosophy. So, whether African philosophy is universally accepted or not, the fact remains that symbols have come to stay as far as this philosophy is concerned. Questions: A- Answer the following questions in 1-3 sentences, using your own words. 1- What means of communication does the writer mention in paragraph 1? (Score: 03) 2- Based on paragraphs 3 and 9, what role do symbols play in African culture and life? (Score: 03) 3- Based on paragraph 4, how are signs different from symbols? (Score: 03) 4- Based on the selection, what two challenges keep African philosophy from becoming universal like Western philosophy? (Score: 03) 5- According to the writer, how might African philosophy achieve international recognition? (Score: 03) B- 1- What type of introduction does the writer use in paragraph 1? What purpose does it serve? (Score: 03) 2- What is the writer's purpose in writing the selection? Explain. (Score: 03) 3- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 3 and 4? Explain. (Score: 03) 4- How does the writer establish credibility in the above selection? Give examples to support your answer. (Score: 03) 2

C- Copy the table below and then write the number of paragraph(s) that correspond(s) to each of the following headings. (Score: 03) Heading Number of Paragraph(s) 1- Challenges Facing African Philosophy 2- Recommendations 3- The Meaning of Philosophy D- The reading selection has nine paragraphs (1->9). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct part that completes ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->9) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score: 04) Extract A- For instance, smoke is the sign of fire because the two go together. An instance of a symbol is green, or white and green. This color symbolizes Nigeria, but there is no way you can link the color to Nigeria as explicitly as that of smoke and fire. Symbols are just like that, for they do not give that kind of obvious meanings; they are mostly or always different from what they signify. Extract B- The fact that cultures vary necessitates the emergence of different meanings of philosophy with different types of philosophies namely: American, Chinese, Indian and recently, African philosophy. In that way, each cultural philosophy is bound to have its own cultural signatures. Symbols can be one of these signatures that characterize African philosophy and its meaning. E- Based on the selection, what does each of the following underlined words refer to? (Score: 04) 1- they (Paragraph 3) 2- former (Paragraph 4) 3- it (Paragraph 6) 4- They (Paragraph 7) F- Find words in the indicated paragraphs that most nearly have the following meanings. (Score: 04) 1- respected and valued (Paragraph 3) 2- to guarantee; ensure (Paragraph 5) 3- to disable (Paragraph 6) 4- obstacles; difficulties (Paragraph 7) 3

Part Two: Writing (Score: 28/70) Choose ONE of the following prompts: Prompt(A): Read the following statement from a reflective essay about great civilizations. Great civilizations are not remembered by their businessmen, bankers or lawyers. They're remembered by their philosophers and artists. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs, provide relevant, specific and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400-500 words with an appropriate title. Make sure you revise and proof
---
 (Paragraph 7) F- Find words in the indicated paragraphs that most nearly have the following meanings. (Score: 04) 1- respected and valued (Paragraph 3) 2- to guarantee; ensure (Paragraph 5) 3- to disable (Paragraph 6) 4- obstacles; difficulties (Paragraph 7) 3

Part Two: Writing (Score: 28/70) Choose ONE of the following prompts: Prompt(A): Read the following statement from a reflective essay about great civilizations. Great civilizations are not remembered by their businessmen, bankers or lawyers. They're remembered by their philosophers and artists. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs, provide relevant, specific and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400-500 words with an appropriate title. Make sure you revise and proofread it. Prompt (B): Read the following statement about cultural awareness. Cultural awareness contributes to mutual understanding among people in different societies. Understanding other cultures eliminates prejudice, enhances tolerance and overcomes social barriers. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, explain how cultural awareness helps in establishing good relationships among people in a culturally diverse world, and discuss how it reduces conflicts and enhances peace. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400- 500 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score:12 1/4), language and style (Score: 12 1/4), tidiness and handwriting (Score:3 1/2). 4

المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : آداب وإنسانيات نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/٤ المدّة : ثلاث ساعات الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسـم: اللغـة الإنكليزيـة وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء أسس التصحيح: A- 1- The means of communication the writer mentions are words and symbols. 2- Symbols are highly valued in the African culture. They are a way for understanding the meaning beyond the physical reality and for giving a spiritual meaning to sickness, death and shared existence. African symbols are also a means for Africans to keep their unity strong. 3- Signs can be understood once they are seen whereas symbols are expressions that could represent another reality. 4- The first challenge African philosophy faces is the absence of an official language that can represent African philosophy in international academic circles because African philosophy is represented by many languages. The second challenge is that there is international academic discrimination that undermines African philosophy as either not good or not original. 5- African philosophers should focus on expanding academic research on the interpretation of symbols in African philosophy and they must study what these symbols signify to become universally acknowledged. B- 1- The writer gives general background information about symbols as a means of communication and their important role in understanding African philosophy and culture. The purpose is to prepare and orient the reader to the topic. 2- The writer's purpose is to explain the place of symbols in African philosophy and identify challenges facing it. 3- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 3, the writer explains how symbols are of great significance in the African philosophy and culture. Then in paragraph 4, the writer clarifies the importance of defining symbols in order to understand their significance in the African philosophy. 4- The writer establishes credibility by using the opinions and statements of real authors, playwrights and philosophers such as Ukagba, Shakespeare and Stinger. C- Heading Number of Paragraph(s) 1- Challenges Facing African Philosophy 5 & 6 2- Recommendations 7 & 8 3- The Meaning of Philosophy 2 5

D- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 4. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 2. E- 1
---
 means of communication and their important role in understanding African philosophy and culture. The purpose is to prepare and orient the reader to the topic. 2- The writer's purpose is to explain the place of symbols in African philosophy and identify challenges facing it. 3- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 3, the writer explains how symbols are of great significance in the African philosophy and culture. Then in paragraph 4, the writer clarifies the importance of defining symbols in order to understand their significance in the African philosophy. 4- The writer establishes credibility by using the opinions and statements of real authors, playwrights and philosophers such as Ukagba, Shakespeare and Stinger. C- Heading Number of Paragraph(s) 1- Challenges Facing African Philosophy 5 & 6 2- Recommendations 7 & 8 3- The Meaning of Philosophy 2 5

D- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 4. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 2. E- 1- The pronoun "they" in paragraph 3 refers to Africans. 2- The word "former" in paragraph 4 refers to symbols. 3- The pronoun "it" in paragraph 6 refers to this sort of discrimination. 4- The pronoun "They "in paragraph 7 refers to African philosophers. F- 1- revered 2- secure 3- cripples 4- hurdles 6
---
