المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : الاجتماع والاقتصاد نموذج : رقم (٨) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغـة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي لحواثِ وَالإنماء نموذج مسابقة (يراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦-٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 24/40) Read the following selection about the human right to adequate food and then answer the questions that follow. An Indispensable Right 1 Given that adequate food is a human right, what follows? Just as with any other human right such as the right to information or to the highest standard of health, or again the right to freedom or the right to a fair trial, what succeeds is that states have certain duties that individuals can justifiably demand that they carry out. States have the obligation to "respect, protect and fulfill" all human rights. This means, first, the state must not itself deprive anyone of access to adequate food; second, it must protect everyone from being deprived of such access in any other way; and third, when anyone is without adequate food, the state must work on preparing an enabling environment where people become self-reliant for food. Every individual is a rights-holder, fully entitled to call the state to perform these duties. 2 Approaches to food security, just like approaches to development, may be called "rights-based" only if they treat these points as fundamental. A rights-based approach views governments' promotion of food security as an obligation, hence not as a form of benevolence. It insists on the accountability of duty-bearers to rights-holders. 3 The rights-based approach is far from being merely a theory or an ideal. It is utterly practical: the non-realization of human rights is not only a frequent result of extreme poverty but also one of its major causes. This indicates that working to realize these rights through rights-based approach is needed for fighting poverty and eradicating hunger. 4 The human right to food is established in many international treaties and other instruments, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR, 1966) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989). Thus, the rights-based approach to food security has a further legal dimension in that governments have a legal obligation progressively to enable all individuals within their borders not merely to be free from hunger but to produce, in ways that are fully consistent with their human dignity, food that is adequate for an active and healthy life. 5 Civil society can put pressure on all areas of government and assist vulnerable groups to empower themselves to claim their rights to food. In the past decade, the strengthening and networking of local community and advocacy groups were two examples of the most promising efforts and developments in the struggle against hunger that helped them. 1

6 Besides, education is needed for the realization of the right to food. Not only is skills training needed for the process of sustainable development, but it is also crucial that general education be provided to everyone, in order that all are aware of the rights they can claim. Children's capacities to ensure their own future food security can be enhanced if human rights, food safety, nutrition, environmental and health education are integrated into school curricula at all levels. 7 The right to food cannot become a reality in a society unless rights-holders can hold duty- bearers to account. Rights-holders will be able to hold duty-bearers accountable for guaranteeing food security only with trusted institutions and a legal system that supports the human right to food. Accountability empowers rights-holders, and makes duty-bearers fulfill their responsibilities. It requires properly functioning institutions that enable individuals to find solutions for any violation of their rights, so that, for instance, marginalized groups can have access to justice to end discriminatory practices. 8 The degree of a state's commitment to the realization of the human right to food can be observed in its development and implementation of policies. Each state party should adopt a national strategy to ensure food security for all, and formulate policies accordingly. Various policy implications of the rights-based approach to food security should follow from the principles of non- discrimination. This should be applied to all stages of the policy process, from development through implementation to monitoring and evaluation of results. Questions: A- Answer each of the following questions in 1-3 sentences using your own words. 1- According to the writer, what is the answer to the question "what follows?" in paragraph 1? (Score: 02) 2- According to paragraph 4, why does the writer believe the rights-based approach to food security has a legal dimension? (Score: 02) 3- Based on paragraphs 5, 6, and 7, what institutions or systems in a society can play a role in realizing the right to food? (Score: 02) 4- Based on paragraph 3, what conclusion can you draw about the rights-based approach? (Score: 02) B- 1- What is the writer's purpose in writing this selection? (Score: 02) 2- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 5 and 6? Explain. (Score: 02) 3- What is the pattern of organization of paragraph 1? Justify your answer. (Score: 02) C- The reading selection has eight paragraphs (1->8). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct part that completes ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->8) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score: 02) 2

Extract A: In addition, approval of international human rights requires states to ensure conformity between their legal systems and their duties in respect of the right to food. Thus, the 153 states that are currently parties to the ICESCR have a legal obligation to ensure that national laws in their legal system respect, protect and fulfill the right to food. Extract B: Even, human rights education should be an integral part of the right to education itself. Knowledge of rights and freedoms is considered a fundamental tool to guarantee respect for the rights of all. D- Based on the indicated paragraphs, what does each of the underlined words refer to? (Score: 02) 1- they ( Paragraph 1) 2- they ( Paragraph 2) 3- them ( Paragraph 5) 4- its ( Paragraph 8) E- The following is a poor version of a one -sentence summary of paragraph 7. Rewrite it correctly. (Score: 02) Poor version: Trusted institutions can support the human right to food to guarantee food security. F- Find words in the indicated paragraphs that most nearly have the following meanings: (Score: 04) 1- putting an end to something completely (Paragraph 3) 2- improved or made better (Paragraph 6) 3- essential or very important (Paragraph 6) 4- dedication or willingness to do something (Paragraph 8) Part Two: Writing Choose ONE of the following prompts: (Score: 16/40) Prompt (A): Read the following statement from an article about the role of civil society. Civil society is a vital partner in any society. It can bring about change by effective action strategies and coordination among its members. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to the role of civil society in making change through raising awareness about public issues, delivering services that meet social needs and supporting the rights of citizens. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. 3

Prompt (B): Read the following viewpoint from an article about eliminating world hunger. It is believed that the greatest cause of hunger is poverty. Yet, there is enough food for all of us, and we are capable of producing enough food for everyone to eliminate world hunger. The problem is in conflicts, wars, agricultural practices, natural disasters and population growth. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 07), language and style (Score: 07), tidiness and legible handwriting (Score: 02). 4

المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : الاجتماع والاقتصاد نموذج : رقم (٨) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز الترابوي للجُوثِ وَالإنتماء أسس التصحيح (تراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦-٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) A- 1- According to the writer, what follows is that the states carry out their duties to implement the right to adequate food. 2- The writer believes that the rights-based approach has a legal dimension because the human right to food is recognized and confirmed by international treaties such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, ICESCR and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 3- The institutions or systems that can play a role in realizing the right to food are civil society, educational and trusted institutions and a legal system that supports the human right to food. 4- A rights-based approach can be helpful and efficient in eliminating poverty and hunger. B- 1- The writer's purpose is to show that the right to food is a state obligation, and governments should be dedicated to realizing this human right. 2- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 5, the writer explains the role of civil society in supporting vulnerable groups in their fight against hunger. In paragraph 6, the writer uses the word "besides" to add the role of education in raising awareness about this right through school curricula. 3- The pattern of organization in paragraph 1 is listing. The writer uses the words "first", "second" and "third" to list the states' obligation towards peoples' right to food. C- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 4. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 6. D- 1- "they" in paragraph 1 refers to states. 2- "they" in paragraph 2 refers to approaches to food security. 3- "them" in paragraph 5 refers to vulnerable groups. 4- "its" in paragraph 8 refers to state. E- The right to food can be ensured through accountability and a supportive legal system to empower rights-holders in protecting their rights and make duty-bearers fulfill their responsibilities F- 1- putting an end to something completely -> eradicating 2- improved or made better -> enhanced 3- essential or very important-> crucial 4- dedication or willingness to do something -> commitment 5