المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : الاجتماع والاقتصاد نموذج : رقم (٤) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للحوثِ والإنماء نموذج مسابقة (يراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦ -٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 24/40) Read the selection below about the nature of tornadoes and then answer the questions that follow. The Unpredictable Nature 1 Tornadoes are one of the most severe types of weather phenomena. While many people fear tornadoes and their destructive power, few people understand their real causes and effects, and less are aware of how to protect themselves from their devastating force. 2 Tornadoes occur when a change in wind direction, coupled with an increase in wind speed, results in a spinning effect in the lower atmosphere. These whirling movements, which may not be visible to the naked eye, are exacerbated when the rotating air column shifts from a horizontal to a vertical position. As the revolving cloud draws in the warm air that surrounds it at ground level, its spinning motion begins to accelerate, forming a funnel that extends from the cloud above it to the ground below. In this way, tornadoes become pendent from storm clouds of low pressure. 3 When a tornado comes into contact with the ground, it produces what is known as a vortex, a spiraling column of wind that can reach speeds in excess of two hundred miles per hour. As tornadoes travel across a landscape, they generate a path of concentrated destruction. It is not uncommon for these twisters to cause damage to heavy objects like cars, trucks or large animals over several miles. Houses under the force of a tornado seem to explode as the low air pressure inside the vortex collides with the normal air pressure inside the buildings. 4 Tornadoes can occur at any time of the year, but are typically most frequent during the summer months. Equally, tornadoes can happen at any time during the day, but usually occur between 3:00 in the afternoon and 9:00 in the evening. While these fierce funnels occur in many parts of the world, they are most common in the United States. On average, there are 1,200 tornadoes per year in this vast nation, causing 70 fatalities and 1,500 injuries. 5 Although they take myriad shapes and sizes, tornadoes are generally categorized as weak, strong or violent. First of all, the majority of tornadoes are classified as weak, meaning that their duration is less than ten minutes and they have a speed under 110 miles per hour. Comprising approximately ten percent of all twisters, strong tornadoes may last for more than twenty minutes and reach a speed of 205 miles per hour. Finally, violent tornadoes are very rare, occurring less than one percent of the time. While uncommon, tornadoes in this classification are the most devastating, lasting more than one hour and resulting in the greatest loss of life. Even though only violent tornadoes can completely destroy a well-built, solidly-constructed home, weaker ones can also cause great damage. 1

6 Despite the powerful and destructive nature of tornadoes, there are, perhaps not surprisingly, people who see it differently. For instance, many people mistakenly believe that tornadoes never occur over rivers, lakes, and oceans. Yet, waterspouts, or tornadoes that form over bodies of water, often move onshore and cause extensive damage to coastal areas. In addition, tornadoes can accompany hurricanes and tropical storms as they move to land. Another common myth about tornadoes is that damage to built structures, like houses and office buildings, can be avoided if windows are opened prior to the impact of the storm. Based on the misunderstanding that open windows might equalize the pressure inside the structure and minimize the damage to it, this action can instead result in fatal injury. 7 Drivers often attempt to outrun tornadoes in their cars, but this is extremely unsafe. Automobiles offer very little protection when twisters strike, so drivers should abandon their vehicles and seek safe shelter. Mobile homes afford little shelter, so residents of these homes should go to an underground floor of the strongest nearby building. In the case of a building having no underground area, a person should go to the lowest floor of the building and place himself or herself under a piece of heavy furniture. If no building is available, a person caught in a tornado should lie flat in a nearby ditch or other lower area of land and cover his or her head. Questions: A- Answer the following questions in 1- 2 complete sentences using your own words. 1- Based on paragraph 5, how should a tornado be classified if it lasts for thirty minutes and reaches a speed of 180 miles per hour? Explain. (Score: 02) 2- According to the writer, what two misconceptions do people have about tornadoes? (Score:01) 3- Based on paragraph 7, what is the safest place to seek shelter when a tornado occurs? (Score: 01) 4- Based on paragraph 3, what can be inferred about the nature of tornadoes? Justify your answer. (Score:02) 5- Based on the indicated paragraphs, what does each of the following underlined pronouns and phrases refer to? (Score: 02) a- these twisters (Paragraph 3) b- this vast nation (Paragraph 4) c- it (Paragraph 6) d- this (Paragraph 7) B- 1- What is the writer's purpose in writing this selection? Explain. (Score: 02) 2- What figure of speech does the writer use in paragraph 3? Explain its function. (Score: 02) 3- What is the organizational pattern of paragraph 5? Explain. (Score: 02) 4- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 4 and 5? Explain. (Score: 02) C- Write a one-sentence summary of paragraph 7. (Score: 02) 2

D- Use contextual clues to find the meaning of each word in the box below. Then fill in the blanks with the correct words to complete the following sentences. (Score: 02) revolving ( Paragraph 2 ) rare ( Paragraph 5) devastating (Paragraph 5) prior (Paragraph 6) available (Paragraph7) 1- All the arrangements for the upcoming conference have been completed- to the president's arrival. 2- Big families are quite -these days, though they were fairly common in my parents' generation. 3- The minister was not for a press conference because he was out of the country. 4- The civil war was to our country because of its disastrous impacts on trade and prosperity. E- The reading selection has seven paragraphs (1->7). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct part that completes ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->7) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score: 02) Extract A: The classification of tornadoes by their estimated wind speed is determined by looking at how strong the wind must have been to cause the resulting damage. Accordingly, a measurement system for estimating the intensity of tornadoes after their impact has been devised, a system known today as the Enhanced Fujita Tornado Intensity Scale. Extract B: According to the National Severe Storms Laboratory, the central United States experiences more tornadoes than any other location in the world. Its flat, wide areas foster combinations of weather conditions favorable for tornado formation. Texas, Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Iowa and southern Minnesota are particularly prone to tornadoes. F- The table below shows the annual numbers of tornadoes in three American states between 2011 and 2013. Read the table carefully and then answer the following question. (Score: 02) Annual Number of Tornadoes in USA between 2011 and 2013 Year State 2011 2012 2013 Texas 33 39 43 Nebraska 8 11 14 Kansas 18 25 27 How are the three states, Texas, Nebraska and Kansas, similar in the occurrence of tornadoes? Give evidence from the table. 3

Part Two: Writing Choose ONE of the following prompts: (Score: 16/40) Prompt (A): Read the following statement from an article about the impact of natural disasters. Every year, disasters resulting from natural phenomena such as earthquakes, floods, hurricanes etc. have significant effects on humans and economy. With increased globalization, the consequences extend far beyond the directly impacted country to affect international markets and people across the globe. Thus, people should be made aware of what hazards they are likely to face in their own communities. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to how disasters caused by nature can affect communities and economies and how the public, governments, schools and media can spread awareness to save lives and limit damage. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Prompt (B): Read the following statement from an article about social solidarity. The positive emotions of community members that arise in unpromising circumstances of a natural disaster demonstrate that social ties are very meaningful, deeply desired and intensely rewarding. Accordingly, without the help of community members, natural disasters become social disasters. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 07), language and style (Score: 07), tidiness and legible handwriting (Score: 02). 4

المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : الاجتماع والاقتصاد نموذج : رقم (٤) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها .المركز التربوي للجوثِ وَالإنماء أسس التصحيح (تراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦ -٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) A- 1- A tornado that lasts for thirty minutes and reaches a speed of 180 miles per hour should be categorized as a strong tornado because the range of strong tornadoes is more than twenty minutes with a speed of 205 miles per hour. 2- First, many people believe that tornadoes never occur over bodies of water; second, people think that opening the windows earlier than the tornado equalizes the pressure and protects the building from damage. 3- The safest place to seek shelter is the underground floor of the strongest nearby building. 4- It can be inferred that tornadoes are fierce and destructive because they pass over a landscape at a speed over two hundred miles per hour. They also cause concentrated destruction, damage heavy objects and explode houses. 5- a- "these twisters" in paragraph 3 refers to tornadoes. b- "this vast nation" in paragraph 4 refers to the United States. c- "it" in paragraph 6 refers to the powerful and destructive nature of tornadoes. d- "this" in paragraph 7 refers to the attempt to outrun tornadoes. B- 1- The writer's purpose is to inform the reader about the violent nature and destructive effects of tornadoes and measures to be taken for safety. 2- The writer uses personification by using the word "travel" with tornadoes to help the reader imagine and understand their destructive power that might reach far distances and areas. 3- The pattern of organization of paragraph 5 is listing. The writer uses words such as "first of all" and "finally" to list the three categories of tornadoes. 4- The thematic relationship between paragraph 4 and 5 is addition. In paragraph 4, the writer gives facts about the time and place of tornadoes. Then, in paragraph 5, the writer gives additional information on the categories of tornadoes. C- Many safety measures should be taken during tornadoes such as abandoning a vehicle, going to the lowest floor or hiding in an underground area. 5

D- 1- prior 2- rare 3- available 4- devastating E- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 5. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 4. F- The three states had the highest number of tornadoes in 2013 and the lowest in 2011. The number of tornadoes increased in the three states over the three years. In Texas, the number of tornadoes increased from 33 in 2011 to 43 in 2013.Similarly, in Nebraska, the number of tornadoes increased from 8 to 14 and in Kansas from 18 to 27. 6