المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة فرعا : العلوم العامة وعلوم الحياة نموذج : رقم 2018/2 المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للجوثِ وَالإنماء نموذج مسابقة (يراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي 2016-2017 وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 24/40) Read the selection below about the impact of volcanoes and then answer the questions that follow. Natural Impact 1 A volcano is a mountain that opens downward to a reservoir of molten rock below the surface of the earth. Unlike most mountains, which are pushed up from below, volcanoes are vents through which molten rock escapes to the earth's surface. When pressure from gases within the molten rock becomes too great, an eruption occurs. Eruptions can be quiet or explosive. There may be lava flows, flattened landscapes, poisonous gases, and flying rock and ash that can sometimes travel hundreds of miles downwind. 2 Because of their intense heat, lava flows cause great fire hazards. Lava flows destroy everything in their path, but most move slowly enough that people can move out of the way. 3 Fresh volcanic ash, made of pulverized rock, can be acidic, gassy and odorous. While not immediately dangerous to most adults, the acidic gas and ash can cause lung damage to small infants, to older adults and to those suffering from severe respiratory illnesses. Volcanic ash can also damage machinery, including engines and electrical equipment. Ash accumulations mixed with water become heavy and can collapse roofs. Volcanic ash can affect people hundreds of miles away from the cone of a volcano. 4 Volcanic explosions that are directed sideways are known as "lateral blasts" .They can shoot large pieces of rock at very high speeds for several miles. These explosions can kill by impact, burial or heat. They have been known to knock down entire forests. 5 Volcanic eruptions can be accompanied by other natural hazards, including earthquakes, mudflows and flash floods, rock falls and landslides, acid rain, fire, and (under special conditions) tsunamis. 6 Volcanoes spew hot, dangerous gases, ash, lava, and rock that are powerful. People have died from volcanic blasts. The most common cause of death from a volcano is suffocation. Volcanic eruptions can result in additional threats, such as floods, mudslides, drinking water contamination, and wildfires. Health concerns after a volcanic eruption include infectious diseases, respiratory illnesses, burns, injuries from falls, and vehicle accidents related to the slippery, hazy conditions caused by ash. When warnings are regarded by people, the chances of adverse health effects from a volcanic eruption are very low. 7 Volcanic ash is gritty, abrasive, sometimes corrosive, and always unpleasant. Small ash particles can scratch the front of the eye. Ash particles may contain crystalline silica, a material that causes a respiratory disease called silicosis. Infants, elderly people, and people with respiratory conditions such as asthma and other chronic lung diseases may have problems if they breathe in volcanic ash. 8 Most gases from a volcano quickly blow away. However, heavy gases such as carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide can collect in low-lying areas. The most common volcanic gas is water vapor, followed by carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide. Sulfur dioxide can cause breathing problems in both healthy people and those with asthma and other respiratory problems. Other volcanic gases that affect health include hydrogen chloride, carbon monoxide and hydrogen fluoride. Amounts of these gases vary widely from one volcanic eruption to the next. 1

9 Although volcanic gases usually blow away rapidly, it is possible that people who are close to the volcano or who are in the low-lying areas may be exposed to different health risks. At low levels, gases can irritate the eyes, nose and throat. At higher levels, gases can cause rapid breathing, headache, swelling and suffocation. 10 During volcanic eruptions, you should take precautionary measures: Follow the evacuation order issued by authorities and evacuate immediately from the volcano area to avoid flying debris, and lava flow, and you should avoid river valleys and low-lying areas. If you are unable to evacuate, and in order to protect yourself from falling ash, remain indoors with windows, doors and ventilation closed until the ash settles. Questions: A- Answer questions 1-3 in full sentences using your own words. 1- Based on paragraph 1, how does eruption happen? (Score:01 ) 2- What is the main idea of paragraph 6? (Score: 02) 3- Based on paragraph 7, what conclusion can be drawn about volcanic ash? (Score: 02) 4- Which choice best completes the following sentence? (Score: 01) Based on paragraph 4, it can be inferred that. · lateral blasts are volcanic explosions. " lateral blasts are powerful and dangerous. · large pieces of rock cause lateral blasts. · volcanic explosions cause lateral blasts. B- Refer to paragraphs 2, 3, 7 and 9 and then complete the table below with the correct cause or effect. (Score: 02) Causes Effects 1- lava flows 1- 2- 2- silicosis disease 3- 3- eyes, nose and throat irritation 4- acidic gas and ash 4- C- 1- How can you best describe the writer's tone in paragraph 10? (Score: 02) 2- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 7 and 8? Explain. (Score: 01) 3- What two types of audience might be interested in reading this selection? State the interest of each. (Score: 02) 4- What is the writer's purpose in writing this selection? Explain (Score: 02) D- Following is a poor version of a one-sentence summary of paragraph 3. Rewrite it correctly. (Score: 02) Poor version: Fresh volcanic ash, made of pulverized rock, is not immediately dangerous but it affects people hundreds of miles. 2

E- The following statements misinterpret what is stated or implied in the selection. Rewrite each correctly. (Score: 03) 1- Volcanoes slowly emit the same amount of gases with every eruption. 2- Chances of adverse health effects from a volcanic eruption remain high despite warnings. 3- Volcanic gases in low-lying areas cause only rapid breathing. F- Find words in the indicated paragraphs that most nearly have the following meanings. (Score: 04) 1- openings (Paragraph 1) 2- threats (Paragraph 2) 3- to break and fall apart (Paragraph 3) 4- to flow out fast (Paragraph 6) Part Two: Writing Choose ONE of the following prompts: (Score: 16/40) Prompt (A): Read the following statement about a management program in emergency situations. The fundamental goal of any emergency management program is to minimize the negative effects of natural disasters by prevention, preparedness and coordination of efforts to help the affected people. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to what an emergency management program should include under prevention, preparedness and coordination of efforts to achieve its goal of minimizing the negative effects of natural disasters. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Prompt (B): Read the following statement about the role of man in causing natural disasters. Environmental disasters, such as global warming, landslides and floods are caused by the human interference with nature. Cutting down trees loosens the soil and causes floods and landslides. Therefore, human beings should be held responsible for causing these disasters. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 07), language and style (Score: 07), tidiness and handwriting (Score: 02). 3

المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة فرعا : العلوم العامة وعلوم الحياة نموذج : رقم (2018/2) المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسـم: اللغـة الإنكليزيـة وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوثِ وَالإنتماء أسس التصحيح (تراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي 2016-2017 وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) A- 1- Eruption occurs when the pressure from gases within the molten rock becomes too high. 2- Volcanic eruptions are destructive and threaten people's health and lives. 3- Exposure to volcanic ash can be harmful to the eyes and lungs. 4- It can be inferred that lateral blasts are powerful and dangerous. B- Causes Effects 1- lava flows 1- fire hazards 2- crystalline silica 2- silicosis disease 3- low level area gases 3- eyes, nose and throat irritation 4- acidic gas and ash 4- lung damage C- 1- The writer's tone is instructive and direct. The writer describes measures to be taken during a volcanic eruption. 2- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 7, the writer explains the harmful effects of volcanic ash on health. Then in paragraph 8, the writer mentions the gases that come from volcanoes and are harmful to health. 3- Audience like geologists might be interested in reading this selection to understand the nature and effects of volcanoes. Civil society or governments might also be interested in reading the selection to learn about measures to be taken during volcanic eruptions. 4- The writer's purpose is to explain how volcanic eruptions occur, their dangerous effects on people and environment and what should be done during the eruption. D- Volcanic ash and gas can be dangerous to lungs, property and people over hundreds of miles E- 1- Volcanic gases blow away quickly in various amounts from one eruption to the next 2- The chances of adverse health effects from a volcanic eruption become low when warnings are regarded. 3- Volcanic gases at higher levels can cause rapid breathing, headache, swelling and suffocation. F- 1- "openings" means vents 2- "threats" means hazards 3- " to break and fall apart" means collapse 4- 'to flow out fast" means spew 4