المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة فرعا : العلوم العامة وعلوم الحياة نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/١ المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغـة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء Part One: Reading Comprehension Read the selection below about the change in human values and then answer the questions that follow. (Score: 24/40) Human Values 1 The values of simpler societies for thousands of years were based upon a holistic view of life. Community embraced all individuals who knew that life functions as a whole like an organism with interdependent parts that must be sustained for life to continue. Now, we have lost this worldview. We discovered that by focusing on one component, we can make it more productive. However, we forget the balance of the whole. It is the danger of reductionism. 2 In earlier societies, the intimate dependence upon domestic animals gave more appreciation of the whole environment and helped society to realize that life is entwined with all the natural resources of the world. Although it is not so self-evident, the world today is still dependent upon natural resources. One cannot take endless quantities of everything without upsetting the balance that will reduce the quality of life. The earth is in dynamic equilibrium. 3 We need to ponder the deeper implications of the lost relationship of our civilization with the environment, with each other in our communities and with other societies on earth. I believe better understanding of these relationships is a key to our future options. Thinking more about where we have come from will help us to draw up a balance sheet of what we gained, what we are in danger of losing and where we are going. 4 We pay a price. Actually, it will largely be paid by future generations. Today our focus is on profit, the desire to make more money this year than last and the supremacy of capital. All these urge upon the producer the need to succeed as a business person and to neglect the long-standing practices of sustainable production, care of animals and good management of the environment. New scientific techniques now challenge the sustainability of the environment, put the animal in unnatural conditions, direct its hormonal system, and view the animal solely as a resource to be exploited for profit and lower prices. Slowly, under pressure and with reluctance, some governments are legislating minimally against the most extreme practices in the interests of animal welfare and of the environment. Most politicians resist such legislation because of opposition from businessmen and a society ignorant and uninterested in these issues. 5 A life agenda driven only by values that maximize the material prosperity of the individual is a reductionist view. It takes no account of the larger whole. Yet, the history of human civilization is the story of solidarity in the community slowly built up by hard work and wisdom but periodically destroyed by narrow agendas and foolishness. 6 Civilizations progressed when the quality of human life was defined to include transcendence as well as material prosperity. Civilizations declined when a material agenda and 1

individual greed squeezed out values. Europe has a heritage which upgraded society over many centuries and defined the quality of life in multiple dimensions. But, to our loss, we are neglecting our heritage and increasingly having a tunnel vision for personal material prosperity. 7 We have lost touch with the values that our ancestors learned from their animals. They knew the fact that for a cow to have a calf and produce milk next year, you cannot take all the resources of the cow this year. 8 Under the influence of science and market economy pressures, values in our world have lost the holistic approach. We are driven by values that are leading us from legitimate self-interest to greed. It is time to give respect to the lessons from animals that guided our ancestors. 9 I am not advocating a return to animal power and primitive lifestyles. The world needs good science and responsible business to create wealth to raise the quality of life throughout our exploding world population. Rather, I am calling for higher human values in our world in the business of making and using the new wealth. 10 We are foolish not to think that wholeness and sustainability are quality of life experiences that are not provided by the search for endless and greater material prosperity. Our current values today are divorced from real and long-term meaning and are unable alone to deliver quality life. We must change - or unpleasant change will be forced upon us and our children. We truly miss the animals and the lessons our ancestors learned from them. Questions: A- Answer each of the following questions in 1-3 complete sentences, using your own words. 1- What comparison does the writer make in paragraph 1? Explain. (Score: 02) 2- What does the writer mean by a reductionist view? (Score: 02) 3- In paragraph 5, what human values does the writer emphasize by referring to the history of civilization? (Score: 01.5) 4- Why does the writer use Europe as an example in paragraph 6? (Score: 01) 5- Based on paragraph 4, how would you describe the writer's attitude towards the world today? Justify. (Score: 02) B- 1- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 7 and 8? Explain. (Score: 02) 2- What is the writer's purpose in writing the selection? Explain. (Score: 02) 3- What figure of speech does the writer use in paragraph 10? What is its function? (Score: 02) C- The reading selection has ten paragraphs (1->10). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct part that completes ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->10) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score: 02) Extract A: These higher human values are characterized by a sense of community which means sharing and interdependence; by genuine self-interest in the quality of life for all people instead of individual greed and by patiently working with nature on the interests of sustainable use. 2

Extract B: The attractions of larger numbers of animals to ensure that some of them survive periods of drought have to be balanced against overgrazing and poorer quality animals. Those who prefer more and more animals will nearly lose the balance of earth's natural resources. D- Write a one-sentence summary of paragraph 3. (Score: 02) E- Based on the selection, what does each of the following underlined pronouns refer to? (Score: 1.5) 1- it (Paragraph 1) 2- these (Paragraph 4) 3- them (Paragraph 10) F- Give the meaning of the following words using contextual clues. (Score: 04) 1- sustained (Paragraph 1) 2- ponder (Paragraph 3) 3- solely (Paragraph 4) 4- welfare (Paragraph 4) Part Two: Writing (Score: 16/40) Choose ONE of the following prompts. Prompt (A): Read the following statement about the relationship between man and nature. Sooner or later, we will have to recognize that the Earth has rights, too, to live without pollution. What mankind must know is that human beings cannot live without Mother Earth, but the planet can live without humans. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above statement. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Prompt (B): Read the following quote about environmental protection. "The world really isn't a very big place. The air we breathe, the water we drink and the earth we stand upon are connected to all other people on all other parts of the globe." Write an essay in which you explain the above quote. As you develop your essay, explain how cooperation among people and good practices in the use of natural resources help in protecting the well-being of the environment. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 250-300 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 07), language and style (Score: 07), tidiness and handwriting (Score: 02). 3

المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة فرعا : العلوم العامة وعلوم الحياة نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/١ المدّة : ساعتان ونصف الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء أسس التصحيح: A- 1- The writer makes a comparison between the simple societies' view of life that was holistic and our modern view that focuses on one part ignoring the whole. 2- According to the writer, reductionism is a view that focuses only on materialistic gains of the individual ignoring the wholeness and sustainability for a better life. 3- The writer uses the history of human civilization to emphasize the values of hard work, solidarity and wisdom. 4- The writer uses Europe as an example to illustrate how respecting human values and human life as a whole makes societies persist for a long time. 5- The writer's attitude is critical. The writer criticizes current human practices that focus on profit with no respect for the environment, scientists who exploit animals, politicians who are indifferent about animals and the environment, as well as the society that is ignorant. B- 1- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 7, the writer explains how we have lost the values of our ancestors. Then, in paragraph 8, the writer continues to explain how we have lost the holistic view because of greed. 2- The writer's purpose is to prove that in our civilization, current values do not ensure wholeness and a sustainable quality of life. 3- The figure of speech is personification. The writer uses "divorced" to explain how our values today are far and disengaged from real and long-term meaning. C- Extract A is the correct ending of paragraph 9. Extract B is the correct ending of paragraph 2. D- People need to reconsider their relationship with nature and other communities for a better future and a greater balance between gains and losses. E- 1- "it" in paragraph 1 refers to life. 2- "these" in paragraph 4 refers to the focus on profit, the desire to make money and the supremacy of capital. 3- "them" in paragraph 10 refers to animals. F- 1- "sustained" means supported to continue to exist. 2- "ponder" means think carefully. 3- "solely" means only. 4- "welfare" means well-being. 4