المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : المتوسطة نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/١ المدّة : ساعتان الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 24/40) Read the selection below about nutrition education programs and then answer the questions that follow. Nutrition Education 1 Healthy eating in childhood improves children's health because it positively impacts their growth and might protect them from the development of obesity and chronic diseases later in life. The school environment provides an effective setting for teaching children about nutrition and healthy eating. Accordingly, nutrition education programs have been used over the past few decades to teach children about nutrition and provide them with knowledge and skills to make healthy food choices. 2 Nutrition education is not just learning about food and vitamins; it is for learning about what to do and how to act to improve nutrition. Starting nutrition education in the early school years can be a suitable opportunity for shaping children's thinking about food because eating habits are formed during childhood. 3 The aim of nutrition education is to develop positive attitudes towards good food and physical activity and to provide motivation for leading a healthy lifestyle. In addition, it aims to assist children in identifying valid resources that provide correct information about healthy food. Nutrition education also seeks to offer children lifelong knowledge and skills they can pass on to their own families and future generations. 4 In general, nutrition education programs include maintaining healthy weight, food safety and information about kinds of food required for the processes of the body and its growth. Besides, nutrition education involves various learning activities for children, staff and parents in a group setting. They may include presentations, food preparation, discussions, food tasting and physical fitness programs. 5 Subsequently, planning nutrition education programs requires guiding educators on designing a nutrition curriculum to ensure a well-defined program. Governments should help by providing fundamental nutrition concepts to be learned in each grade level and within subjects such as Life and Earth Sciences. Also, plans for nutrition education programs need to be connected with healthy school meals to help children experience eating nutritious food. Teachers need to design interesting cooking projects to help children learn about food. For example, teachers can focus on cooking vegetables or following a recipe of whole grains to stress the importance of selecting nutritious food. 6 A school garden project can help to reinforce the nutrition education of children and their families. The main benefit of a school garden project is that children learn how to work collaboratively to grow healthy food and use it for better nutrition. This can best be done if the garden fresh fruits and vegetables are used for school meals. Beyond this, a school garden project would raise awareness about protecting the environment. 7 Hence, schools have the ability to impact future public health. Nutrition education should start in school not as an optional subject but a compulsory one that ends with a final exam; if you fail, it means you have to do remedial studies. 1

Questions: A- Answer the following questions in complete sentences using your own words. 1- Based on paragraph 1, why is healthy eating in childhood important for children's health? (Score: 01) 2- What is the main idea of paragraph 3? (Score: 02) 3- Based on paragraph 5, what conclusion can be drawn about planning nutrition education programs? Justify your answer. (Score: 02) 4- Based on the selection, what does each of the following underlined pronouns refer to? (Score: 03) a- them (Paragraph 1) b- it (Paragraph 3) c- They (Paragraph 4) B- Refer to the selection to complete the following sentences. (Score: 02) 1- Awareness about protecting the environment can be increased by- 2- Early nutrition education influences children's thinking about food because- C- The reading selection has seven paragraphs (1->7). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct part that completes ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->7) the one that fits with each extract. (Score: 02) Extract (A): It may also reinforce basic academic skills such as reading and writing when children make research about how to plant and grow healthy food in a garden. Extract (B): For successful learning experiences, nutrition activities should be designed to fit specific objectives that can ultimately impact children's practices related to nutrition. D- Use contextual clues to figure out the meaning of each word in the box below. Then fill in the blanks with the correct words to complete the following sentences. (Score: 04) Effective (Paragraph1) suitable (Paragraph 2) various (Paragraph 4) fundamental (Paragraph 5) optional (Paragraph 7) 1. The room was decorated with flowers and plants of- sizes and colors. 2. Attending our next meeting is ; you decide to join us or not. 3. She needs to buy new clothes that are for the wedding dinner. 4. The first results showed that the new medicine was in treating the disease. E- In each of the following sentences, there is ONE grammatical error. Identify the error and then correct it (Score: 04) 1- They are working on the project for the last three days, and they are not done yet. 2- We haven't heard from him since he had left to Paris. 3- The blood test results haven't discussed with the doctor yet. 4- I wish I have a bigger car now. 2

F- Rewrite the following sentences, starting each as indicated, without changing the meaning. (Score: 04) 1- There are many old resources in the library, but the students are not allowed to use them now. Although 2- The dealer won't give you the motorcycle if you do not pay the money. Unless- 3- "Why didn't the manager send the documents last week?" asked the client. The client asked- 4- Schools use many types of material to teach nutrition in the classroom. . Many types of material . Part Two: Writing (Score: 16/40) Choose ONE of the following prompts: Prompt (A): Read the following statement about the importance of health education. Although a healthy lifestyle differs from one person to another, learning about how to live a healthy lifestyle is necessary for improving the quality of life and achieving mental and physical well-being. Make an outline and then write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to the role of learning about healthy behavior in improving our mental and physical health. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 150-200 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Prompt (B): Read the following statement about the role of education in one's life. Education is the most powerful tool you can use to change the lives of people because it can change the future for those who prepare for it today. Based on the statement above, write a narrative essay about someone you know or heard about whose life has changed to the better due to his/her educational achievements. As you develop your essay, describe the person's educational achievements and the way this person's life has changed because of knowledge and skills he/she gained and used to live a better life. Copy and fill in the chart below and then write the essay. Your essay should be between 150-200 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. 3

1 Title 2 Setting 3 Character(s) 4 Events 5 Ending 6 Lesson Learnt Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 05), language and style (Score: 05), outline/chart and title (Score: 04) and tidiness and legible handwriting (Score: 02). 4

المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : المتوسطة نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/١ المدّة : ساعتان الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء أسس التصحيح : A- 1- Healthy eating in childhood is important because it has positive effects on children's growth, and it protects them from obesity and chronic diseases in the future. 2- Nutrition education has many goals. 3- Planning nutrition education programs needs much effort because it requires many actions. It requires designing a curriculum, connecting nutrition concepts with school subjects and school meals as well as designing cooking projects by teachers to involve children. 4- a- "them" in paragraph 1 refers to children. b- "it" in paragraph 3 refers to nutrition education. c- "They" in paragraph 4 refers to learning activities. B- 1- Awareness about protecting the environment can be increased by doing a school garden project. 2- Early nutrition education influences children's thinking about food because eating habits are formed during childhood. C- 1- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 6. 2- Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 4. D- 1- various 2- optional 3- suitable 4- effective E- 1- are working-> have been working 2- had left-> left 3- haven't discussed-> haven't been discussed 4- have-> had F- 1- Although there are many old resources in the library, the students are not allowed to use them now. 2- Unless you pay the money, the dealer won't give you the motorcycle. 3- The client asked why the manager hadn't sent the documents the week before. 4- Many types of material are used to teach nutrition in the classroom. 5