المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : المتوسطة نموذج : رقم (١٠) المدّة : ساعتان الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغـة الإنكليزيـة وآدابها المركز التراوي للبحوثِ وَالإنتماء نموذج مسابقة (يراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦-٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 24/40) Read the selection below about the problem of global warming and then answer the questions that follow. Save Our Mother Earth! 1 Environmental issues caused by the harmful effects of human activities on the biophysical environment are becoming increasingly more complicated worldwide, urging us to do something to protect the world we live in. Yet, none of them can be compared to the problem of global warming. Global warming refers to the gradual increase in the overall temperature of the earth's atmosphere generally attributed to the greenhouse effect caused by increased levels of carbon dioxide and other pollutants. It is the greatest environmental challenge in the 21st century that might lead to the ultimate end of the existence of life on earth. We all must realize the harsh reality of this problem and take actions to stop it before it is too late. 2 Research findings about global warming show that several greenhouse gases are responsible for warming the earth. When these greenhouse gases pile up in the atmosphere, they trap some of the heat that comes from the earth. Because the earth's heat cannot escape, the planet warms up with serious consequences. The chief contributor to these gases is carbon dioxide that forms a thickening blanket around the earth, trapping the heat and raising the temperature of the earth. Other greenhouse gases include methane, generated by decaying refuse1 of man and animals, and chloro-fluorocarbon (CFC) released from spraying cans. Unfortunately, some of the modern technological applications, such as industrial processes of factories, vehicles exhaust fumes and many other chemical malpractices have certainly increased the concentration of greenhouse gases. 3 Scientists point out that the earth's rising temperature has already started to show drastic by- products2, for instance, the melting of the ice cap at the poles ,causing the rise in sea levels that leads to coastal flooding. They also believe that hurricanes are likely to become stronger and droughts more common. Yet, the most serious danger is the disruption of habitats which may drive many plants and animal species to extinction. 4 In fact, technology and materialistic gain have made us neglect our mother earth. It is time to reconsider our attitudes towards the environment. We have to realize that we have much more in common with the plants, animals, air and water than we have with the mechanical, chemical, and electronic world we have made around us. We certainly have to make up our minds whether or not 1 items or material discarded or rejected as useless or worthless; trash or rubbish 2 something produced in the making of something else 1

our future life should be based on the quantity of harmful technology or the quality of natural environment we live in. What we need is a big step in the right direction. Change only happens when individuals take actions. There's no other way if it doesn't start with people. Questions: A- Answer the following questions in complete sentences using your own words. 1- According to paragraph 1, why does the writer consider global warming the most dangerous environmental problem? (Score: 02) 2- Based on paragraph 2, what major gases lead to the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere? (Score: 02) (Score: 01) 3- What is the main idea of paragraph 3? 4- How would you describe the writer's attitude towards technology? Give evidence from the selection. (Score: 02) 5- Based on the selection, what does each of the following underlined pronouns refer to? (Score: 01) 1-them (Paragraph 1) 2- They (Paragraph 3) B- Copy the chart below and then complete it with the number of paragraph that corresponds to each heading. (Score: 03) Paragraph Heading Paragraph Number Causes Suggestions Problem C- Refer to the selection and then complete the following sentences. (Score: 02) 1- Greenhouse gases are responsible for global warming because they 2- The rise in sea levels that leads to coastal flooding is due to . . D- The table below shows the average of global warming by the percentage of released greenhouse gases between 2000 and 2015. Read the table carefully and then answer the following question. (Score: 03) Average of Global Warming by Percentage of Released Greenhouse Gases between 2000 and 2015 Year Average of global warming Percentage of released greenhouse gases 2000 1.8 °℃ 23% 2005 2.5 °℃ 32% 2010 3.3 ℃ 41% 2015 4.2 °℃ 48% 2

What does the table indicate about the relationship between global warming and released greenhouse gases? Give evidence from the table. E- Read the following sentences and then find, in the indicated paragraphs, ONE word that can best replace the underlined words or phrase. (Score: 04) 1- We should all understand that pollution has negative effects on man and animals. (Paragraph 1) 2- Although doctors still debate the causes of her pain, the primary cause seems to be the internal injury in her stomach. (Paragraph 2) 3- The man has been proven innocent, and he will be set free from jail soon. (Paragraph 2) 4- Students who disregard doing their homework will not pass the final exam .(Paragraph 4) F- Rewrite the following sentences, starting each as indicated, without changing the meaning. (Score: 04) 1- The heating of the atmosphere can cause many health problems. 2- Global warming raises the sea level and increases the intensity of hurricanes. Not only 3- The swimmer drowned because the sea was too rough. . Many health problems If 4- The scientist asked, "What has the researcher presented in the conference?" The scientist asked Part Two: Writing: Choose ONE of the following prompts. (Score: 16/40) Prompt (A): Read the following statement from an article about environmental problems. Environmental problems affect not only the planet Earth but also the human beings who live on it. Make an outline and then write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to one environmental problem (other than global warming), explain its negative effects on the environment and on human beings and then give your suggestions for solving such a problem. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 150-200 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. 3

Prompt (B): Read the following statement from an article about preserving our planet. Preserving our planet is the biggest challenge of humanity because environmental problems are diseases that can't be cured; they can only be prevented. Based on the statement above, write a narrative essay about the experience of some family members who were forced to move to another area because the natural resources they depended on for living (e.g. fishing, animal farming, planting etc.) were threatened by some environmental problems. As you develop your essay, describe what problems the people faced, how they suffered and what they did to make their living again. Copy and fill in the chart below and then write the essay. Your essay should be between 150-200 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. 1 Title 2 Setting 3 Characters 4 Events 5 Ending Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 05), language and style (Score: 05), outline/chart and title (Score: 04) and tidiness and legible handwriting (Score: 02). 4

المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : المتوسطة نموذج : رقم (١٠) المدّة : ساعتان الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغـة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للحوثِ وَالإنماء أسس التصحيح (تراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦ -٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) A- 1- According to the writer, global warming might result in ending the life of all living things on earth. 2- The gases that lead to the buildup of greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide, methane, and chloro-fluorocarbon. 3- The earth's rising temperature may lead to serious environmental consequences. 4- The writer's attitude is critical. The writer states that technological applications unfortunately increase greenhouse gases. The writer also describes technology as harmful and makes people neglect their mother earth. 5- "them" in paragraph 1 refers to environmental issues. "They" in paragraph 3 refers to scientists. B- Paragraph Heading Paragraph Number Causes 2 Suggestions 4 Problem 1 C- 1- Greenhouse gases are responsible for global warming because when they add up in the atmosphere, they trap some of the heat that comes from the earth. 2- The rise in sea levels that leads to coastal flooding is due to the melting of the ice cap at the poles. D- The table indicates that global warming increases with the increase in released greenhouse gases. The average of global warming was 1.8 ℃ in 2000 and reached 4.2 ℃ in 2015. Likewise, the percentage of released greenhouse gases was 23% in 2000 and reached 48% in 2015. 5

E- 1- understand > realize 2- primary > chief 3- set free > released 4- disregard > neglect F- 1- Many health problems can be caused by the heating of the atmosphere. 2- Not only does global warming raise sea level, but it also increases the intensity of hurricanes. 3- If the sea had not been too rough, the swimmer wouldn't have drowned. 4- The scientist asked what the researcher had presented in the conference. 6