المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : آداب وإنسانيات نموذج : رقم (١) المدّة : ثلاث ساعات الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي البحوثِ والإنتهاء نموذج مسابقة (يراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦-٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) Part One: Reading Comprehension (Score: 42/70) Read the selection below about health problems caused by psychological stress and then answer the questions that follow. Psychological Stress and Cancer 1 Psychological stress describes what people feel when they are under mental, physical or emotional pressure. Although it is normal to experience some psychological stress from time to time, people who experience high levels of psychological stress or who experience it repeatedly over a long period of time may develop mental and/or physical health problems. 2 Stress can be caused by the pressure of both daily responsibilities and a trauma or cancer in oneself or a close family member. When people feel that they are unable to control changes caused by the pressure of normal life responsibilities or cancer, they are in distress. Distress can reduce the quality of life of cancer patients. There is also some evidence that distress is associated with a poorer clinical outcome. 3 Under physical, mental or emotional pressure, the body responds by releasing stress hormones that increase blood pressure, speed heart rate and raise blood sugar levels. These changes help a person to escape any perceived threat. 4 Research has shown that people who experience intense and long-term stress might develop digestive problems, fertility problems, urinary problems and a weakened immune system. People who experience chronic stress are also more prone to viral infections such as the flu or common cold and to have headaches, depression and anxiety. 5 Apparent links between psychological stress and cancer could arise in several ways. For example, people under stress may develop certain risky behaviors, such as smoking, overeating or drinking alcohol, which increase a person's risk for cancer. Also, someone who has a relative with cancer may have a higher risk for cancer because of a shared inherited risk factor, not because of the stress induced by the family member's diagnosis. 6 People who have cancer may find the physical, emotional and social effects of the disease stressful. Those who attempt to manage their stress with risky behaviors such as smoking or drinking alcohol or who become more sedentary may have a poorer quality of life after cancer treatment. In contrast, people who are able to cope with stress using relaxation and stress management techniques become more energetic with lower levels of depression, anxiety and symptoms related to cancer and its treatment. 7 Evidence from experimental studies does suggest that psychological stress can affect a tumor's ability to grow and spread. For example, an experimental study has shown that when mice bearing human tumors were kept isolated from other mice - a condition that increases stress - their tumors were more likely to grow and spread. In one set of experiments, tumors transplanted into 1

the mammary fat pads of mice had much higher rates of spreading to the lungs and lymph nodes if the mice were chronically stressed than if the mice were not stressed. 8 In another survey study, women with breast cancer who had been treated with chemotherapy were asked about their use of beta blockers, which are medications that block the effect of stress hormones, before and during chemotherapy. Women who reported using beta blockers had a better chance of surviving their cancer treatment without a relapse than women who did not report beta blocker use. 9 Although there is still no strong evidence that stress directly affects cancer outcomes, some data do suggest that patients can develop a sense of helplessness or hopelessness when stress becomes overwhelming. This response is associated with higher rates of death, although the mechanism for this outcome is unclear. 10 On the other hand, emotional and social support can help patients learn the importance of coping with stress. Such support can reduce levels of depression among patients. Approaches can include training in relaxation, meditation or stress management, counseling or talk therapy, cancer education sessions, social support in a group setting, medications for depression or anxiety and finally exercise. 11 Some experts recommend that all cancer patients be screened for distress early in the course of treatment. A number also recommend re-screening at critical points along the course of care. Health care providers can use a variety of screening tools, such as a distress scale or questionnaire, to gauge whether cancer patients need help managing their emotions or with other practical concerns. Patients who show moderate to severe distress are typically referred to appropriate professionals, such as a clinical health psychologist, social worker or psychiatrist. Questions: A- Answer each of the following questions in 1-3 sentences using your own words. 1- According to paragraph 1, under what conditions does psychological stress become health threatening? (Score:02) 2- Based on paragraph 6, how does the way cancer patients manage stress affect the quality of their lives? (Score:02 ) 3- According to paragraphs 7 and 8, how can stress be a factor that promotes negative cancer outcomes? (Score:02 ) 4- According to paragraphs 10 and11, who can help cancer patients cope with psychological problems associated with cancer? How can this be done? (Score: 04) 5- Based on paragraph 3, what can be inferred about the role of stress hormones in a person's life? Justify. (Score: 04) 6- Based on the indicated paragraphs, what does each of the following underlined words refer to? (Score:03) a- Those (Paragraph 6) b- their (Paragraph 7) c- A number (Paragraph 11) 2

B- 1- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 7 and 8? (Score:02 ) 2- In paragraphs 4, 7 and 8, what kinds of support does the writer use to explain the effects of psychological stress? (Score: 02 ) 3- What is the organizational pattern of paragraph 6? Explain. (Score: 03) 4- Specify two types of audience who might be interested in reading the above selection. State their interest. (Score: 03) 5- The following is a poor version of a one-sentence summary of paragraph 2. Rewrite it correctly. (Score: 03) Poor version: Everyday problems cause stress that leads to a poorer clinical outcome. C- The following sentences are false for they misinterpret what is stated or implied in the selection. Rewrite each correctly. (Score: 02 ) 1- People with digestive problems and a weak immune system develop severe and chronic stress. 2- Stress hormones that are released under a particular threat reduce a person's ability to avoid it. D- The table below shows the percentages of people with stress symptoms by age in 2015. Read the table carefully and then answer the following question. (Score: 04) Percentages of People with Stress Symptoms by Age in 2015 Age group Year 20 -29 years old 30-39 years old 40-49 years old 50-59 years old 2015 36% 53% 68% 76% What do the percentages indicate about the relationship between age and stress symptoms? Explain with evidence. E- The reading selection has eleven paragraphs (1->11). Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct ending of ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->11) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score: 02) Extract A- It is probable that people who feel hopeless or helpless do not seek treatment when they become ill, fail to adhere to potentially helpful therapy, engage in risky behaviors such as drug use or do not maintain a healthy lifestyle, resulting in premature death. Extract B- Studies on mice with human cancer cells grown in the laboratory have found that the stress hormone norepinephrine, part of the body's fight-or-flight response system, may promote the development of new blood vessels and secondary cancerous growths. 3

F- Use contextual clues to figure out the meaning of each word in the box below. Then fill in the blanks with the correct words to complete the following sentences. (Score: 04) outcome ( Paragraph 2) relapse ( Paragraph 8) coping ( Paragraph 10) course ( Paragraph 11) screening ( Paragraph 11) 1- The worst that I can see of cutting the education budget is that our students will fail in their final exams. 2- Before determining the presence or absence of a disease, tests are used to identify people who should have additional testing of probable risk conditions. 3- Robert is incapable of with the difficulties of such a complicated political situation. 4- He recovered a little after the operation, but few days later there was a , and he passed away on the 2nd of April. Part Two: Writing Choose ONE of the following prompts: (Score: 28/70) Prompt (A): Read the following statement from an article about stress in one's life. Stress has almost become a norm in most people's lives. Yet, the way people handle stress is what makes them differ from one another. People's ability to cope with stress can be stimulated by several factors (personal, social, physical, etc.) that help them in different stressful situations. Write an essay in which you explain the above statement. As you develop your essay, refer to the differences among people in handling stress and to the factors that can help them overcome or deal with stress. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400-500 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Prompt (B): Read the following viewpoint of someone who experienced a stressful life. The best way to live a healthier, less stressful and more relaxing life is to do nothing. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above viewpoint. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400-500 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 12 1/4), language and style (Score: 12 1/4), tidiness and handwriting (Score: 3 1/2) 4

المادة : لغة إنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : آداب وإنسانيات نموذج : رقم (١) المدّة : ثلاث ساعات الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغـة الإنكليزيـة وآدابها المركز التربوي للحوثِ وَالإنماء أسس التصحيح (تراعي تعليق الدروس والتوصيف المعدّل للعام الدراسي ٢٠١٦-٢٠١٧ وحتى صدور المناهج المطوّرة) A- 1- Psychological stress becomes threatening to people's physical and mental health when they experience it at high levels or more frequently for a long time. 2- Some cancer patients might become inactive or start smoking, drinking alcohol and this may reduce their quality of life after cancer treatment. On the other hand, other cancer patients deal with stress successfully through relaxation and stress management techniques, and this may make them less disposed to depression, anxiety and cancer-related symptoms. 3- Stress can cause tumors to grow and spread. It might also make women with breast cancer relapse during cancer treatment because of stress hormones. 4- Specialists such as clinical health psychologists, social workers, psychiatrists, health care providers and experts can help cancer patients cope with psychological problems. This can be done by providing emotional and social support to deal with stress such as offering training in relaxation, meditation, stress management, talk therapy, cancer education sessions, group support, medication and exercise. It is also helpful to have cancer patients screened early for distress using different tools such as a distress scale or questionnaire. 5- It can be inferred that stress hormones play an important role is a person's safety or survival. These hormones cause physical changes that help a person avoid a perceived threat. 6- a- "Those" in paragraph 6 refers to people who have cancer. b- "their" in paragraph 7 refers to mice bearing human tumors. c- "A number" in paragraph 11 refers to experts. B- 1- It is a relationship of addition. In paragraph 7, the writer explains how psychological stress might make a tumor grow and spread. In paragraph 8, the writer gives additional evidence from a survey that stress might cause a relapse during cancer treatment. 2- The writer uses evidence taken from research, experimental and survey studies. 3- It is a contrast pattern of organization. The writer explains the differences between the ways cancer patients cope with stress. The writer uses words such as "in contrast", "more sedentary", "poorer quality of life", "more energetic" and "lower levels". 4- Audience might be psychologists, social workers, doctors, psychiatrists and experts to learn about the link between stress and cancer and how to help cancer patients cope with stress. Cancer patients and their family members would also be interested in reading the selection to know how to deal emotionally with cancer. 5- Feeling unable to control changes caused by normal or unusual life incidents might lead to distress that affects the quality of life of cancer patients. 5

C- 1- People who are exposed to severe chronic stress may develop digestive problems and a weakened immune system. 2- Stress hormones that are released under a particular threat boost a person's ability to avoid it. D- Stress symptoms increase with the increase in age. Older adults are more likely than younger adults to experience stress symptoms. In 2015, adults of age group 50-59 years had a higher percentage of 76% compared with 68% for ages 40-49 and 53% for ages 30-39 in addition to 36 % for ages 20-29 years. E- Extract A is the correct ending of paragraph 9. Extract B is the correct ending of paragraph 7. F- 1- outcome 2- screening 3- coping 4- relapse 6