المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : آداب وإنسانيات نموذج : رقم ٢٠١٩/٢ المدّة : ثلاث ساعات الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسـم: اللغـة الإنكليزية وآدابها Part One: Reading Comprehension المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء (Score: 42/70) Read the selection below about malnutrition in the world and then answer the questions that follow. A World Without Hunger 1 Improving nutrition is fundamental to achieving the vision of a world without hunger. The international organizations have a leading role in ensuring good nutrition for all. The work and leadership actions in nutrition issues at global and national levels declined in the past, primarily due to lack of priority given to nutrition. However, over the past five years, the importance of nutrition has been rising on international and national agendas. Global and country leaders believe that they must bring the perspective of food and agriculture to their efforts to ensure eradication of malnutrition. They also believe that a strategy is needed to prioritize work on nutrition at country, regional and global levels. 2 Problems of malnutrition such as under-nutrition, deficiencies in basic substances required for normal growth and obesity exist in all countries and among various socio-economic classes. Yet, in the poorest countries, under-nutrition is by far the most disturbing problem. According to WHO (World Health Organization), almost 167 million children under five years of age are chronically malnourished. Deficiencies in vitamin A and iodine in adults range from around 30 to 40 percent in Africa and Asia and 10 to 20 percent in Latin America. Iron deficiency in non-pregnant women is also high in these regions. Unfortunately, these numbers have not changed much in spite of the widespread of food fortification and distribution of supplements and therapeutic foods. 3 The environment surrounding malnutrition is also changing. Many emerging challenges are leading to the transformation of food and agricultural systems and raising questions about how to meet the world's food and nutrition needs in maintainable ways. These include globalization, climate change, environmental sustainability and rapid shift to technology and scientific advances. In addition, urbanization is directly related to survival and patterns of food acquisition and consumption. By 2020, half the population of Asia will live in urban areas. This will be true of Africa by 2035. Most of this growth will occur in the smaller cities and market towns of developing countries, many of which are highly dependent on the agriculture of the surrounding rural areas. 4 At the same time, many developing countries, including middle-income economies, face a 'nutrition transition'. Uneven economic growth and changes in cultural norms and behavioral practices have involved new food consumption preferences and major dietary changes. As a result, the prevalence of overweight, accompanied with non-contagious diseases, is increasing; at the same time the under-nutrition and micronutrient deficiencies continue to exist. 5 Such recent fast-growing trend in malnutrition is increasingly being attributed to lifestyle changes. Food system changes influencing nutrition status are, in turn, shaped by economic 1

transformations including the increasingly powerful commercial control of the production and the processing and marketing of food and beverages. 6 Governments and other actors at global and national levels have become increasingly aware of the importance of improving nutrition. Nutrition is not only an outcome of overall social and economic development, but is also understood as an essential input affecting productivity and overall well-being. The basic causes of under-nutrition of children are the limited availability of sufficient quality of food and poor feeding behaviors. For adults, the causes are food choices, inadequate health care and an unhealthy environment. 7 Despite this awareness, under-nutrition persists for several reasons. One reason is that the most nutritionally vulnerable people, such as those who have low income or are resource-poor and food insecure, often have little say in public policy matters, and they lack the means to call for appropriate nutrition policies. Another important reason is that decision-makers believe that the consequences of under-nutrition are practically impossible to address through public policy. Therefore, such people in power hesitate to push for specific actions on nutrition. Another equally important factor relates to the knowledge gaps concerning the relation between food and nutrition that continue to persist. These knowledge gaps lead to limited awareness of the problem, its impacts and potential solutions. Also, the causes of under-nutrition cut across multiple sectors while solutions depend on the collective action of multiple players, including citizens and the private sector. Governments often find it difficult to carry out the needed programs to deal with under- nutrition effectively. Finally, even when solutions are known, institutional and individual capacities at country level, especially among governments are insufficient for effective implementation. Questions: A- Answer the following questions in 1-4 sentences using your own words. 1- Based on paragraph 1, who are the major players in achieving the vision of a world without hunger? (Score: 03) 2- Inparagraph2, why does the writer consider under-nutrition the most disturbing problem in poor countries? (Score: 03) 3- In paragraph 4, what does the concept of 'nutrition transition' refer to? (Score: 03) 4- Based on paragraph 7, what is common between decision-makers and nutritionally vulnerable people? Explain. (Score: 03) 5- Based on paragraph 3, what does the writer imply about the role of urbanization in developing countries? Justify. (Score: 03) B- 1- What type of introduction does the writer use in paragraph1? What purpose does it serve? (Score: 03) 2- What is the thematic relationship between paragraphs 3 and 4? Explain. (Score: 03) 3- Identify the pattern of organization used in paragraph 7. Explain. (Score: 03) 4- What is the writer's purpose in writing the selection? Justify. (Score: 03) 2

C- The following sentences are false for they misinterpret what is stated or implied in the selection. Rewrite each correctly. (Score: 04) 1- Overweight, accompanied with non-contagious diseases, is increasing while nutrition and micronutrient deficiencies are decreasing. 2- Economic transformations have occurred due to changes in the food system. D- The reading selection has seven paragraphs 1->7. Each of the following extracts (A and B) is the correct ending of ONE paragraph in the selection. Read extracts A and B carefully and then choose from paragraphs (1->7) the one that correctly fits with each extract. (Score: 04) Extract A: Consequently, major transformations have profoundly and rapidly transformed nutrition challenges in the last two generations, requiring greater understanding of continuity and changes in food system and other aspects reshaping human nutrition and malnutrition. Extract B: With over 1.6 billion people afflicted with such transitions in nutrition preferences, governments must act now to address this emerging problem before solutions become even more complex and costly. E- Based on the indicated paragraphs, what does each underlined word refer to? (Score:03) 1- These (Paragraph 3) 2- This (Paragraph 3) 3- those (Paragraph 7) F- Use contextual clues to figure out the meaning of each word in the box below. Then fill in the blanks with the correct words to complete the following sentences. (Score: 04) eradication (Paragraph 1) fortification (Paragraph 2) deficiency (Paragraph 2) prevalence (Paragraph 4) trend (Paragraph 5) 1- Because of the increase in the consumption of salty junk food, the of high blood pressure in adults continues to be dominant in the modern world. 2- The recently issued statistics show that, there is a clear towards early retirement at the age of fifty in Europe. 3- The systematic use of vaccination against plague has led to the of this fatal disease forever. 4- The of milk products with vitamin D is systematically done in some countries to increase its nutritious value. 3

(Score: 28/70) Part Two: Writing Choose ONE of the following prompts: Prompt (A): Read the following quote about the issue of hunger. "Hunger of choice is a painful luxury; hunger of necessity is a terrifying torture." Write an essay in which you explain the above quote. As you develop your essay, explain the difference between both types of hunger and then refer to the negative effects of hunger caused by necessity on the psychological, social and economic levels. In your essay, provide a thesis statement in the introduction, a topic sentence in each body paragraph and support the main idea with relevant, specific and adequate details. Give examples drawn from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400-500 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Prompt (B): Read the following statement from an article about population and feeding the world. People are hungry not because the population is growing so fast and food is becoming scarce, but because people cannot afford it. The problem now is in the international trade, economic policies and the control of land that have led to immense poverty and hunger and, therefore, less access to food. Write an argumentative essay in which you argue for or against the above quote. As you develop your essay, support your position by drawing on logical reasoning and experience. In your supporting paragraphs provide relevant, specific, and adequate evidence and examples from your reading, experience or observation. Your essay should be between 400-500 words with an appropriate title. Revise and proofread your essay. Your essay will be evaluated based on content and organization of ideas (Score: 12 1/4), language and style (Score: 12 1/4), tidiness and handwriting (Score: 3 1/2). 4

المادة : اللغة الإنكليزية الشهادة : الثانوية العامة الفرع : آداب وإنسانيات نموذج : رقم ٢ /٢٠١٩ المدّة : ثلاث ساعات الهيئة الأكاديميّة المشتركة قسم: اللغة الإنكليزية وآدابها المركز التربوي للبحوث والإنماء أسس التصحيح: A- 1- The major players are leading members in international and national organizations. 2- The writer considers under-nutrition the most disturbing problem in the poor countries because the figures of the malnourished population estimated by World Health Organization are high and include children, adults and women. Also, these figures have not changed although the means for food supplements are widely spread. 3- "Nutrition transition" refers to dietary changes and new preferences in food consumption that occurred as a result of economic and cultural changes. 4- Both nutritionally vulnerable people and decision makers feel hopeless about addressing the malnutrition problem through public policies because nutritionally vulnerable people lack the means to call for such policies and decision makers do not believe the public policies can be helpful. 5- The writer implies that urbanization will have a negative impact on the nutrition and survival in the developing countries. It is expected that urban population growth will increase in Asia and Africa. This will increase food consumption in urban areas which will increase the demand for food production from surrounding rural areas. B- 1- The writer gives historical background of the problem of malnutrition by referring to the leading role of international organizations in ensuring nutrition and the changes in their role over time. The purpose is to orient the reader to the problem of malnutrition. 2- The thematic relationship is addition. In paragraph 3, the writer explains the challenges of meeting the world's nutrition needs. Then, in paragraph 4, the writer further explains the persistence of the problem of malnutrition and the factors that led to changes in food consumptions 3- The writer follows the cause/effect pattern of organization by using words such as "reasons", "causes", "impacts", "therefore" and "lead" in order to explain the causes and effects of the problem of malnutrition. 4- The writer's purpose is to inform the reader about the worldwide problem of malnutrition: its causes, effects and those involved in solving it. C- 1- Overweight, accompanied with non-contagious diseases, is increasing while nutrition and micronutrient deficiencies still persist. 2- Changes in the food system have occurred due to economic transformations. D- Extract A is the correct part that completes paragraph 5. Extract B is the correct part that completes paragraph 4. 5

E- 1- "These" in paragraph 3 refers to emerging challenges. 2- "This" in paragraph 3 refers to population living in urban areas. 3- "those" in paragraph 7 refers to the nutritionally vulnerable people. F- 1- prevalence 2- trend 3- eradication 4- fortification 6